"Ah cara eu amo ser considerada
uma criança superdotada, eu espero que não
me torne um perfeccionista... perfeccionista
burnout... com
burnout, eu suponho, com depressão,
ansiedade, expectativas vazias e sem
interesses ou objetivos reais"
Isto é algo que alguém
postou no nosso subreddit, vocês sabem
que é um meme. Nós tivemos algumas
lives sobre burnout e crianças superdotadas
então hoje o que eu gostaria de falar
um pouco com vocês é sobre
a trajetória de uma criança superdotada
para um perfeccionista com burnout,
também como a sociedade
na verdade faz as crianças superdotadas
meio que fracassarem.
Eu sei que é meio interessante, mas
quando pensamos sobre uma criança superdotada,
pensamos sobre... consideramos
a superdotação como uma vantagem,
mas na experiência trabalhando com várias
crianças superdotadas, não é sempre uma
vantagem e normalmente pode ser um fardo
e tenho visto isso um monte em nossa
comunidade, eu trabalhei com muitas
pessoas que meio que se encaixam nessa
categoria, suponho que eu talvez me encaixe nisso também.
Onde eu cresci meio que... eu sou superdotado, certo?
Tipo a escola foi fácil para mim,
me contaram desde cedo que eu era inteligente
eu era meio que responsabilizado por tipo...
não estudar, certo? Nessa época eu
não estudaria muito
e talvez conseguiria um B+ ou um A-.
E os meus professores falavam
a mesma coisa para os meus pais nas reuniões,
eles sempre falavam
"Se Alok se aplicasse, ele seria o melhor estudante da turma",
"Se ele apenas estudasse mais ele seria o melhor estudante da turma",
eles falavam tipo
"Ele é super inteligente, ele tem um monte de potencial"
certo, eles usam palavras tipo...
eles falam sobre o quão inteligente eu sou
eles falam sobre o potencial que eu tenho
e se eu me aplicasse eu seria...
você sabe, eu seria um... eu seria o melhor estudante
Isso é interessante
pois consideramos superdotação com uma vantagem,
mas como uma dos meus professores disse-me,
falaremos disto mais ao final,
ela me explicou que um...
isto foi na... na... na faculdade de medicina,
mas quando eu estava treinando para ser um psiquiatra,
eu tinha uma supervisora que me contou que
superdotados... crianças superdotadas são crianças
de cuidados especias e o que isso
literalmente significa é que:
as necessidades de uma criança que é superdotada
são diferentes de uma criança normal,
e os pais que reconhecem que isso
e reconhecem que essa criança
precisará de uma estrutura diferente,
um currículo diferente
ou uma maneira diferente de serem criados,
são os que acabam fazendo um bom trabalho,
e estranhamente na experiência dela,
ela descobriu que assim como qualquer
outra criança de cuidados especiais um...
você sabe, crianças que não foram...
tratadas apropriadamente, mesmo com a superdotação,
eram os que enfrentavam dificuldades.
Essa afirmação, quando ouvi-a pela primeira vez,
eu pensei que era absolutamente ridícula,
explodiu um pouco a minha cabeça,
mas eu respeitava muito a supervisora e
comecei a pensar sobre isso.
O que eu gostaria de compartilhar com vocês hoje,
é sobre a trajetória de vida que uma criança superdotada tem,
como a sociedade trata elas,
como os pais tratam elas,
as dificuldades que elas enfretam
ou as influências que elas têm,
não vamos chamar de dificuldade
porque talvez não seja uma dificuldade,
e depois como elas terminam.
Eu gostaria de compartilhar com...
isso com todos vocês hoje, ok?
A primeira coisa que tende a acontecer
é que quando uma criança é superdotada, elas...
a escola tende a ser fácil, certo?
Se você pensar de maneira desenvolvimental,
tem um monte de coisas que
acontecem na escola, então vamos falar sobre a escola.
A escola é um lugar onde você consegue...
você socializa, certo? Desenvolve
habilidades de socialização, é um lugar onde
você aprende e as pesam que escola
é primeiramente sobre aprendizado,
e é primeiramente sobre aprendizado, mas não é apenas
sobre aprender as matérias, sim
aprendemos sobre aritmética e
matemática e todas essas coisas,
aprendemos história e ciências e todas essas coisas boas,
mas realmente a escola se você olhar para ela de
maneira desenvolvimental é uma oportunidade maravilhosa
para aprender coisas chaves,
socialização  é uma peça importantíssima,
a outra coisa é tipo os hábitos
e como estudar, que é o primeiro tipo
de desvantagem, que eu penso que
as crianças superdotadas enfrentam
é que sabe se você é muito jovem e
é superdotado, escola é tão fácil, que você
passa sem a luxúria de estudar,
nós meio que consideramos isso
uma vantagem, certo, se você
passa passa pela escola e não estuda,
tipo é fácil, fácil, facílimo, certo?
E é assim e faz sentido,
mas a... a coisa interessante que eu
descobri, é que normalmente ser
inteligente, especialmente se você é muito jovem,
na verdade pode te botar na
rota do fracasso, pois você nunca
precisa  aprender o hábito de estudar
que você precisa...
que você precisa para o sucesso mais tarde.
Para uma criança normal o que tende a acontecer é
que tipo elas não precisam estudar  na
primeira série, mas talvez tipo na segunda série
terceira série, elas têm que aprender a
estudar uma vez na semana, talvez elas precisem
a aprender a esudar na noite antes da
prova porque não vêm tão fácil para elas
e então a quarta quinta série, agora
você está... você está fazendo dever de cada alguns
dias da semana, sabe você está estudando dois
ou três dias antes do destes,
daí você vai para o fundamental 2,
onde porventura você está estudando quatro dias antes
da prova e então tem esse
senso gradual de responsabilidade crescente
enquanto vai cada vez mais longe na escola
e é meio que planejado dessa forma, certo?
Nós não somos... tipo
year old that they're
like giving 14
hours of homework a
week to it's just
absurd and then at
the top end of the
spectrum in terms
of study habits and
what we demand of
students you have
something like let's
say law school or
medical school or
things like that where
people are regular
studying like 60
hours a week 80 hours
a week in medical
school because you
know people have have
grown up and have
built enough of a
study habit where
they can actually
handle that pace of study
so what happens with
the gifted kid so
the gifted kid you
know when you sort of
level up your skill
to level one like in
the first grade and
then you level up
your studying skill
to level two in the
second grade and
level three in the
third grade so the
gifted kid never
actually has to like
grind that xp for
levels like one through
five of studying
habits
and so they sort of
managed to get b's
or a's without
really minimal with
minimal studying or
no studying at all
and then seventh
grade rolls around
eighth grade rolls
around they start to
struggle a little bit
maybe they get b's
they're still not
learning how to study
because they sort of
skipped that part
of of the you know
the skill building
and we'll kind of get
to that later and
then what tends to
happen with gifted
kids is that they
don't need to study
and then they hit a wall
they finally get
into some kind of
situation where
their raw intellect
cannot
is no longer sufficient
to handle the
schoolwork that
they're supposed to
handle
but they've trained
themselves at that
point they've customized
themselves at
that point to managing
school with raw
intellect
and so when that
kind of falls short
they like they really
kind of really hit
a wall it's a very
very hard cliff to to
overcome
and so this is kind
of the first thing
that that sort of
shoots gifted kids in
the foot and this
also leads to kind of
this idea of perfectionism
and burnout
because then they
like you know then
they they struggle
a lot they don't
understand why they
can't do it they
they try they know they're smart
everyone's talking to them about
potential they start
to feel really bad
about themselves so
the first kind of
interesting thing
that gifted kids run
into is the fact that
they sort of don't
develop the proper
study habits because
you know as a
six-year-old it's kind of
not your fault because
like you're not
mature enough as a
six-year-old to
realize like oh i
need you know to have
good study habits
so even though the
teacher said this
last tuesday and i
understand that i
don't need to study
i'm going to sit down
and like practice
my study habits it
doesn't make any
sense it's like
completely artificial
so that's the first
thing that happens
is that they kind of
hit this wall of of
you know not being able to study
the second thing
to consider is the
expectation so another
thing that really
leads gifted kids kind
of down the wrong
path is
the burden of expectation
that's placed
upon them so from
a very young age
they're told oh
you're gifted you're
smart you're special
you have so much
potential and so what
that starts to do
is it constructs like
a very very lofty
goal in their minds
right so i'm going
to use kind of an
analogy which is kind
of like you know if
i think about an
amazing home like
i think about a
mansion it can have a beautiful
blueprint and i can
buy a gigantic piece
of land and i can look
at that and i can
say like oh like this
this home or this
this blueprint has
so much potential
and sometimes we
kind of forget that
like
you can have like you can have a
blueprint for a mansion
but that's gonna
actually take way
more work to achieve
than like building a
shack so the other
really interesting
thing that that we
sort of kind of get
wrong societally is
that we assume that
when someone is
gifted
things are actually
going to be easier
for them that they
need to work less to
accomplish the same amount
but in my experience
living up to a
gifted child's potential
involves more
work it's sort of
like you know it's
just like building
a shack versus
building a mansion
like sure the mansion
is capable of so much
more than the shaq
is capable of but let's
not forget for a
moment that the amount
of effort that it
goes into building a
mansion is actually
way more than what's
required to build a
shack this is the
second place that
gifted kids kind
of get tripped up
because everyone around
is looking at them
and they're sort of
saying
oh like this is an
amazing mansion like
you could build such
an amazing mansion
and we all kind of
forget for a moment
that like actually
living up to that
potential is very
very difficult and
requires a lot more
of an investment
than building a shack
and so this gap
between what people
expect of you and
also the idea that
things should be easier for you
kind of compound on
themselves and sort
of end up with
gifted kids kind of
feeling like they're
they're failing at
everything right
because they have all
this potential
and they're not they're
just not living
up to it
so the other thing
that we'll see in
gifted kids is that
what what tends to
happen is that they
will put in some
amount of work
but they're expecting
a mansion when
all they've really
put in is as much as
building a shack
i may have lost you
a little bit there
but let me just explain
so
you know what a
gifted kid will do is
they'll like look at
their peers right
and they'll say like
oh like this person
did this and they're
able to accomplish
this so like i should
be able to do that
too and so if you look
at your neighbors
who are building a
shack and they're
like whoa they went
to home depot and
they got like 100
pounds of wood and
they built their
shack over a weekend
and then like you
go and get your 100
pounds of wood from
home depot and you
start like brought
to you by home depot
i suppose um and you
start building your
mansion like i know
it sounds kind of
weird but you know
100 pounds of wood
may be enough to build
a shack but it's
nowhere near enough
to build a mansion
and then what gifted
kids will do is
they'll look at like
the foundation that
they've laid with a
hundred pounds of
wood and they'll be
like where's the i
don't even have a
shack like you know
it's it's like they
look at what they've
accomplished when
they put in the same
amount of energy as
someone else and
they get really
confused because this
person has a complete
shack over here
and like i have like barely the
beginnings of a mansion
and so then that
sort of negatively
impacts them they
start to like feel
like they're actually
inferior to these
other people because
they've been told oh
you're smarter than
the kid next door
like why the hell is
getting into college
and like you're not
even getting into
college and so it
all sort of sort of
sort of compounds right
because even for
the gifted kid they're
not trying to
build a shack because
they've been told
they've been they're
gifted their entire
life so it's not enough
to be average if
you're gifted so what
you have to do is
you try to you know
build a mansion
because that's what you've been
told that you're
capable of that's the
expectation you set
for yourself and
then you're you're left kind of
scratching your head
and wondering like
why you don't even
have a shack yet even
though you studied
for a month and they
studied for a month
you're not getting
as much as that they're getting
and it's kind of
super bizarre right
because we don't we
just don't think
about it that way
we think that if
you're gifted that
means that everything
should be easier for
you that it not
only they may need a
hundred pounds of
wood to build a shack
but you should be
able to build a shack
and 50 pounds of
wood it should be
easier for you but it
turns out paradoxically
being harder
and then we sort of
end up with kind of
the final state of a
gifted kid which if
we kind of think about
it internally is
a state of like
really shame and low
self-esteem so all
this stuff kind of
compounds right like
you're told you're
smart so you set
this expectation of
what you're capable
of like way up here
and then like you
know first grade goes
by and you're up here
second grade goes
third grade goes
by and you're up
here boom boom boom
fourth grade fifth
grade sixth grade
10th grade 11th grade
and then you kind
of tank right and as
you go to college
suddenly like you
don't have the study
skills involved and
now in the gap
between what you're
capable of and what
you actually
accomplish this gap is
where shame comes from
this is the shame
gap that gifted kids
inevitably fall
into
which is when they
fall short of what
their expectations are
and this could be
once again
due to the fact that
you're you know
you're setting out
to build a mansion
and you ended up not
even building a
shack right so all of these
discrepancies between
your expectations
and your accomplishments
in that gap and the
bigger the gap is
the more it's filled with shame
so then what happens
is kids are ashamed
right because they
should be doing more
they should be doing better
and then like the
shame then further
compounds and makes
it hard to find
motivation and this
is where you kind of
get burnout so then
like you have these
gifted kids and you're
like hey man just
like go to a community
college you don't
have to go to an
ivy league school
school you don't
have to go to like
harvard or stanford
or mit just like go
to your local community
college and in
that comes a bunch
of shame because
you've been told your
entire life that
you're better than that right
and so you start to
develop this ego
of being a super smart
kid and then this
leads to avoidance of
things because all
you're left with is
the identity of a
smart kid so you can
never even bring
yourself to go to
community college
because smart kids
don't go to community
college in your mind
that's where the
stupid kids go and if you go to
community college
then suddenly you've
lived your entire
life for 20 years
being told you're a
smart kid it's the
only that's your
biggest strength it's
the one that everyone
keeps talking
about and now like
suddenly you have to
relegate yourself to
being a stupid kid
and in that gap is
where the shame lives
in that gap is where
the ego lives okay
so it's really really
hard right because
you're set up with
these expectations
people don't really
acknowledge that
because you're capable
of a lot it's
actually going to
take like a lot of
work to take that
potential and bring it
to fruition
right and that's like
that's the biggest
thing is people just
lose sight of the
fact that building
a mansion actually
takes more work than
building a shack
and your entire life
people have told
you like you should
build this mansion
because that's what
you're capable of
and so then we kind
of get to all right
so like what do we
do about it right so
if you're a gifted
kid who's kind of
perfectionistic and
burnt out and like
society has sort of
set you up this way
i'm not saying that you're not
individually responsible
as well but i
do think that there's
a whole reason so
when we have like a
generation of burnt
out gifted kids i
think we have to be
fair and be a little
bit scientific and
kind of acknowledge
that this may not be
like an individual
problem right we've
got a generation of
kids like this like
maybe there's something
societal going
on and i think
paradoxically we sort of
set these kids up to
struggle and so
then the question
becomes okay like what
do we do about it
so the first thing
you should do if
you're a gifted kid is to stop
comparison right like
comparison is is
the foundation of
getting out of this
problem
because as long as
you are comparing
yourself and this is
part of the issue
is that if you think
about the word
gifted
what does the word
gifted imply it is a
word that has no meaning
outside of a comparative
framework you
guys get that the
only way you can be
gifted is if there
are other people who
are not gifted
and so essentially
what happens is like
the whole idea of
a gifted kid only
exists in relationship
to another kid
and so what we find
in the minds of
gifted kids is that
they're comparing
themselves all the
time oh i don't want
to go to community
college that's where
the stupid people
go oh i don't know
like why i can't do
what my friend is
capable of like he's
able to do so much
why am i not able to
do so much i have
an older sibling
who did fantastic
and now i have big
shoes to fill right
there's so much
comparison all of the
expectations that
gifted kids have don't
come from themselves
right because if you
actually based your
expectations on what
you're capable of
you'd be capable
of a b c d or an f
that's what that
would be a realistic
expectation but instead
you create these
artificial expectations
that are based
on comparison and why
do gifted kids do
that because it
starts with their
parents it starts
with their teachers
we're all told that
we're gifted which
is by definition a
comparison to all of
the other kids
and so then what
happens is you're
looking over at the
shack and you've got
this blueprint for
a mansion and they
give you some wood
and then you try to
build the mansion
and like you don't
even have a roof when
this person has a
completely built shack
and then you kind
of look at yourself
well like man i must
be like a super idiot
right like and
it's just it's so
bizarre that when we
set up this kind of
when we start with
this framework of a comparison
we sort of doom
ourselves to failure
because there's like we're just
it's just it's never
going to work
because you can't ever
base the expectations
of your life and
what you're capable
of based on what
someone else is doing
right if someone else
is happy studying
chemical engineering
it doesn't mean
that you're going to
be happy studying
chemical engineering
if somebody else is
happy dating someone
of the opposite sex
it doesn't mean that
you're going to be
happy dating someone
of the opposite sex
the whole point is
as individuals as
humans we're individuals
and if you're a
gifted kid the first
thing you've got to
do is let go of all comparison
so next thing is to
recognize that your
road is going to be
a rough one right so
like when someone
sets out to build a
mansion they know in
their mind that like
this is gonna take
a while right
you can't expect to
build a mansion in
the same amount of
time it would take
someone to build a shack
and so if you're a
gifted kid and you
expect a lot from yourself
okay
recognize that this
is going to be a
long road and the
greater your potential
is the longer it's
going to take for you
to get there and this
is something that
i can understand in
hindsight like so i
grew up as a gifted
kid and was like in
you know the special
classes or whatever
i actually still
remember when i was in
eighth grade my
grades started to dip
and when i went to high school
um i didn't qualify
for based on my
grades like my high
school was like yeah
he needs to be in
like regular english
he can't be in like
advanced english or
he doesn't meet the criteria for
advanced english and
so my parents were
really really not
happy with that
because they have they
have such a smart
boy you know he's so
smart he just needs
to apply himself so
they went to the
school and i remember
having a meeting
with the the honors
english teacher or
whatever and then
he's like do you want
to be in this class
and i was like yeah
i want to be in the
class and my parents
were like yeah he
should be he belongs
he belongs in the class
right and so the
teacher was like okay
fine because you know
i mean you're not
gonna you know there
are some parents that
could potentially
be annoying so
you're like whatever
and so i ended up
being in the class
that i really didn't
belong and i really
didn't do very well
right because i
didn't have the work
ethic but it propagates
sort of this
idea of like you can handle it
so like i started off
you know going on
the wrong track kind
of like in in high
school it took me
i took me five years
to graduate from
college right with a 2.5 gpa
took me another three
or four years to
even get into medical school
and so like my
road has been long
and like that's just
sometimes what it
takes if you're a
gifted kid right you
take the scenic route in life so
oftentimes people
would ask me you know
like
about stuff
when i remember when
i was going to when
i started medical
school and i saw
friends of mine right
who were who i was
in high school with
they're already
fully trained doctors
and you know
flying around and
all that good stuff
and i'm just like
starting medical
school and i was
like yeah i took the
scenic route in life
and so recognize
that if you're a
gifted kid like it's a
long road like you're
not going to do
things faster you're
not going to build
a mansion
as fast as someone
else is going to
build a shack the other thing to
recognize about it
being a long road if
you're a gifted kid
is don't expect to
see the form of your
mansion for a long
time
when other people
have built their
shacks you will
still just have the
foundation of the
mansion it's not going
to have a roof for a
long time it's not
going to have windows
for a long time so
this is the other
problem that gifted
kids run into
is as they put in
an equal amount of
effort compared to
their colleagues they
actually see less
return on their
investment and that
in turn shatters
their motivation and
what makes them
want to give up
right because i'm
putting in all this
effort i'm still not
seeing anything yet
so it's a long road
be patient with
yourself and try
your best not to
compare to other people
the last thing to
kind of consider is
that is the shame so gifted kids
oftentimes struggle a lot with
self-esteem and
shame and that once
again is because their
expectations are
up here and their
performance is down
here right
and so in that gap
is where your shame
is going to live
and so as long as there
is a gap in what
you expect from yourself
with what you accomplish
you will have shame
and the solution to
that oddly enough
is one of two ways
right
one is you can actually
live up to the
expectations that you
have right so you can
actually shoot up
here and land up here
so you can go to
an ivy league school
or whatever right
you can go you can start
you can do a tech
startup or whatever
like you can like
do everything that
everyone has always
known you're capable
of doing so you can
actually hit all of
those metrics that's
one option then the
shame will go away
or what you can do
is let go of your
expectations
and bring yourself
down here because the
shame exists in the
gap so even if you
accept yourself as
being like sort of a
failure oddly enough
the shame will go
away and as you accept
yourself as you
are which is not
wasted potential but
like in the present like you are
everything that
you're capable of
everything that you've
ever been capable
of is exactly what
you've achieved and
once you sort of
take that attitude
bring your expectations
down to here you
will be amazed at
like what happens to
your motivation and
what you are truly
capable of
but you can't achieve
it as long as
there is that shame
gap right like in
terms of performance
so questions
anyway so let me just
kind of summarize
so i think that like
you know we see this
a lot where a lot
of people are gifted
and we think of that
as an advantage but
like i was saying earlier
i think that
you know sometimes
being gifted comes
with its own set of needs
and by properly
addressing those needs
we can avoid some of
these things like
gifted kids you know
feeling ashamed of
themselves gifted kids
you know not like
comparing themselves
to like all the other
normal kids and
and finding themselves lacking
um and also that
we have to kind of
acknowledge that our
school system is
sort of set up in a
particular way that
oftentimes causes
gifted kids to stumble
and through understanding
like how a
gifted kid you know
a child who is
gifted becomes an adult who's
perfectionistic and burnt out
we have to understand
that whole life
cycle in order to sort of
start taking steps to change it
um
okay so i'm sure
you've been asked this
question before and
have answered before
so feel free to
tell me where i can
finally answer this
question how are you
able to get accepted
to harvard medical
school let alone
medical school alone
with such a low gpa
when that is such a
critical deciding factor
how did i stand out
so that's a great
question so the short
answer is so i i
did some amount of
graduate education so
i did a master's
degree to boost my gpa
the second thing that
i did i didn't go
to harvard for medical
school i went to
tufts for medical
school and then i did
my psychiatry training
at harvard at
mass general mclean hospital
and so the short
answer of like how i
wound up there is
like one step at a
time
so you have to do
you know in each of
those things involved like
a reality check
or some degree of
humility in terms of
like thinking like
i actually don't
belong at harvard like
i'm never going to
wind up there i had
to accept that right
let alone get into
medical school
and the more that i
accepted like i i
did a lot of things
that were you know
humbling to say the
least i wouldn't
quite say undignified
but i had to
really let go of a
lot of ego and like
take one step at a
time it also took
perseverance i mean
i applied to 120
medical schools
before i got into a
single one and that
was the break that i
needed
and then like
understanding having all
that failure behind me i really
worked hard in medical school
and really tried to excel
and then i actually
did an away rotation
for those of you don't
know what that is
or for those of you
do know what that is
so i basically did
an audition rotation
at harvard which is like super
competitive you show
up there with a
bunch of other people
who want to go
there and it's
basically like a test
it's like a month-long
test of what
you're capable of and
i did really well
so thankfully i had
set up you know a
lot of good stuff over the last
eight years
in terms of being
myself and like owning
the person that i
was and not being
ashamed of the
fact that i failed
and you know recognizing
that most of
the students most of
the other students
who were auditioning
um were four years
younger than i was
that i was actually
older than some of
the residents there
despite the fact
that like they were
evaluating me right
so like there's
someone two years
younger who's like
giving me a grade
so navigating all that stuff was
difficult but i did a
good job at it and
stayed focused and
that's how i wound up
at harvard so i trained
there for four
years and that's where
i'm faculty now
right but it's all
about like letting go
of the ego
um how do you lower expectations
uh you lower expectations
by accepting
what you're capable of
like actually and so
expectation and and
acceptance are at
opposite ends of the
spectrum
okay so
practicing acceptance
is
how you lower expectations
so let me give you
guys an example so
the theme today is
right so like let me
think about a nyani
yoga exercise to let
go of expectations
um
let me just think
about this for a
second
so here's a good example
of a nyani yoga
exercise actually i
don't know if this
is a good example
this is one of the
ones that i feel less
confident this is maybe
a bad example of
a yoga exercise
so for the next
month or two months
when you go to a restaurant
and someone asks you
what you want to
want what you want
to order just tell
the waiter to surprise you
just tell them surprise me
and then pay attention
to your enjoyment or
lack of enjoyment
of the food
right so when we
go to restaurants
we have expectations
and if we think
about the least
the worst experience
that you can have
at a restaurant is
not actually to have
bad food
it's to expect really
good food and get
bad food that's
actually worse than
getting bad food if you know a
restaurant is crap
and you go there and
you order something
the food that you
get is crap like what
were you expecting
it's totally fine
actually right we do
that every day like
if you go to a fast
food like mcdonald's
or taco bell or
whatever like you're
not expecting you
know like a gourmet
meal you're just
expecting some like
mediocre arguably
incredibly tasty
depending on whether
you're getting a
mexican pizza or not
which you can't get
anymore because
they're out of
sad
but
so like a lot of if
you guys want to
really understand
so this is the way
that nyanio works if
you really want to
understand expectation
and acceptance
you have to put
yourself in situations
that are like free
from expectation
and you can't put yourself in a
situation because
the expectation
doesn't come from
the situation right
it's even that's
even what i said
was kind of wrong
you have to practice
messing with your
expectations so go to
restaurant just say surprise me
or you can ask if
they don't know like
if they're taking
it back you can say
what's good here
okay i'll take that
right if you've got
dietary restrictions
tell them about the
and just like and
then you're like but
what if i don't like
the food that i get
well yeah i mean
that's the point right
so like just eat
what you get and see
what happens
and they're like but
i don't like it and
it's like yes so like
pay attention to
that and be like how
hard is it for you
to order food that
you're not gonna like
or you order without
expectations what's
it like to go to a
restaurant and accept
that you're going
to just get some
random pile of
food that could be
amazing and could be
something that you
really dislike
that's how you gain
acceptance that's
how you let go of
expectations by
literally going to a
restaurant and like
actively letting them go
that is the nyani yog
and then you may
discover all kinds of
cool things right you
may even discover
for example that
if you go to the
restaurant and you expect
crap if you're like
this is going to be
an absolute train
wreck i'm gonna have
to go home and like
have a bowl of
cereal after the meal
it'll be really interesting
how much you enjoy
your meal it'll be
really interesting
because in that
moment what you're
doing is letting go
of the expectation
right and then like
suddenly even if you
get crap it's not a
big deal and if you
get something delicious
it's like such a
huge win and that's
what it means to let
go of expectation the
more you let go of
expectation the more
you start to enjoy
life and the better life gets
it's kind of bizarre
so literally if you
guys wanted nyani
yoga practice to let
go of expectations
and earn acceptance
and you can't just
do this once right
so you can't like
wuss out of it
you have to do it for a month
presuming you're going
to go out to eat
you know and you can
afford that and all
that good stuff
otherwise like make
it three months
like
you know do it for a
while like commit
yourself this is
my life now gg get
wrecked noobs
so
try it you guys want
to learn nyan yog
try it
okay someone else is
asking how should a
parent teacher or
manager support the
special needs of gifted
people if what's
happening now is
bad that's a great
question so i'll
give you an example
so sometimes i get
parents that come
into my office
they have a kid who's
addicted to video
games why is a kid
games really simple
because video games
match the pace of
the child right
that's why that's why
gifted kids in a
nutshell the reason
that gifted kids get
addicted to video
games is one very
very very simple
reason can all be
reduced to this
games match the pace
of the child and
school doesn't
so you've got a kid
goes to school gets
a worksheet does the
worksheet i still
remember i i had
this experience i
skipped the first
grade so this is what
happened
i went to a school
where you know i'd
do a worksheet and
then like they'd give
me another one and
so in in my first day
of first grade i
moved schools i i
gave them you know i
got a worksheet i
did the worksheet i
gave it back to them
and i said can i
have the next one and
she's like what do
you mean the next one
it's like the next
one like whatever's
next like i'm done
with this we've got
class for another 45
minutes i'm done
with this can i have
the next one she's
like there is no next
one i'm like what
and it didn't take
long where like you
know she gave me the
then she evaluated
me and i got moved
up a grade but same
problem there
and then eventually
like what heck is
like school moves
at the pace of like
the slowest person now
here's the really
addictive thing about
a video game now
imagine you're just
bored at school
because it's moving
at a snail's pace
right because there's like other
six-year-olds and like you're a
six-year-old two
and maybe you're a
little smarter than the other
six-year-olds now
enter a video game
what happens when you
don't beat level
one
you replay level one
and what happens
when you beat level
one you go straight
to level two and if
you beat level two
you go straight to
level three you beat
level three you go
straight to level
four
so games perfectly match
the challenge
that a human being
is capable of right
if you get stuck on a
boss in dark souls
like
you don't get to
move past the boss
because your parents
make a phone call
to from software and
they're like hey my
son is really good
at video games can
you please advance
him past this boss
and stick him to the
next boss it's like
you can't do that
in dark souls like
dark souls doesn't give a
right
so like kids get
addicted to video games
because they perfectly
match what you're
capable of which is
exactly what kids
like there's this
whole thing called
intent to mastery
we teach all this
stuff to parents and
things like that
so what do you do
if you've got a kid
who's gifted you
challenge them and you
don't rely on school
to do it for you so
when parents come to
me and they're like
i have a kid who's
addicted to video
games he's 16. he
thinks school is i ask
him okay what do you
think about schools
like school is boring
then what i do is i
you know i make a
couple of phone calls
and i'm like we're
gonna like you so
we were i was back
when i was in boston
a lot of cool
startups in boston
so what i'll do is
we'll make some phone
calls we'll stick
them in an internship
somewhere like
we'll take some
college-level internship
it's some kind of
startup so like we'll
look around at like
incubators from like
mit or whatever like
harvard will be
like hey like there's
a kid do you guys
have any internship
opportunities
available and we'll
stick him there and
he'll like be he'll
work there for the
summer and it like
turns the kid right
around no more video
games because he's
actually like learning
so i stuck one
kid in this startup that was
that there's an app
you take a picture
of a mole on your
body and it tells you
the percentage chance
that the mole is
cancerous
right so we stick
the kid there we're
like go help them
and then like sometimes
the kid is like
what am i supposed
to do like you start
by getting them coffee
and then maybe you'll
learn something
and then it's it's
actually fantastic
like they do they
do really well you
challenge them right
and because the
cool thing is that a
lot of the startup
folks they sort of
recognize because
some of them are
like misfits too so
they're like okay
there's like a kid
here like let's put
them to work because
they recognize that
okay you're 16. so
you know how to like
manage sql data
databases and the kid
is like no they're
like
google it
and learn and then
you're going to
manage our sql
database next week
and the kid is like
what and like yeah
and then suddenly the
kid is like goes
home he's not playing
video games he's
like reading about sql databases
or whatever
right just just stick
them stick them
into it and challenge them
so as a parent you
know or a teacher
like i'd say like ask
them so here's the
biggest mistake that parents and
teachers make with
gifted children
is that you
when when a gifted
child fails what we
tend to do is slow
down instead what you
need to do is speed
up it's absolutely
terrifying so if a
gifted child is
failing what they need more than
anything else is a
bigger challenge not
like an easier
environment now you have
to make sure for a
couple of other
things like you
need to make sure
there's not adhd
going on depression
going on learning
disabilities or other
things like that
going on but in the
absence of all of those
things challenge
them more not less
ask them to do more
give them put them
in positions of leadership
right
and just push them
because like it's
so fulfilling when
when you're a take a kid in that
situation and you're like
you're gonna need to
do this thing and
they're like i can't
do that thing and
you're like okay so then fail
but try if you fail
like no big deal but
i'm not gonna i'm not
gonna expect less
of you i know it's
kind of paradoxical
because we just talked
about letting go
of expectation
but it's not really
expectations it's
really having faith
in them it's a
subtle difference
but be like i have
faith in you i think
you can handle it
so like give it your best shot
that's what you do
you challenge them
respect them
is instead of expect
things from them
you